
# Essential CLI tools

## Transcoding and more with FFmpeg

[FFmpeg](https://ffmpeg.org/) is an incredibly versatile and reliable tool for processing media files from the command line. It is most commonly used to convert between audio and video formats, a process known as transcoding. You may want to keep this [cheat sheet](https://www.cheatography.com/thetartankilt/cheat-sheets/ffmpeg/pdf_bw/) handy as you learn the ropes.

The basic format looks like this: `audiofile.mp3` is our input file, and `audiofile.wav` is the name we've chosen for our output file.

```
ffmpeg -i audiofile.mp3 audiofile.wav
```

FFmpeg sees the `.wav` extension in the output filename and knows we want to create a WAV. By default, it will stick to the samplerate and bit depth of the input file.

We can add options to specify a particular output format. This command creates a 16-bit, 44.1kHz, mono WAV.

```
ffmpeg -i audiofile.mp3 -acodec pcm_s16le -ar 44100 -ac 1 audiofile.wav
```

We can convert a WAV file to a 320Kbps mp3 like so:

```
ffmpeg -i audiofile.wav -ab 320k -ac 2 audiofile.mp3
```

Try adapting the examples above to transcode a few files in our `sample_audio` set. Then check their specs using `exiftool`.

With a little Bash scripting magic, we can execute the same process on every MP3 in the current directory. Here, `\`basename "$file" .mp3`\` removes `.mp3` from each filename, which we then replace with `.wav`.

```
for file in *.mp3; do
ffmpeg -i "$file" -acodec pcm_s16le -ar 44100 -ac 1 "`basename "$file" .mp3`.wav";
done
```

FFmpeg can also extract segments from audio and video files. The `-ss` option specifies start time and `-t` is the length of our new excerpt. In this case we’re creating a 90-second clip beginning 10 minutes, 11 seconds into the film.  This may take a few minutes.

```
ffmpeg -i audiofile.wav -ss 00:10:11.0 -t 00:01:30.0 audiofile_excerpt.wav
```

Instead of HH:MM:SS.S notation, we can also specify start time and/or length using seconds. The following command produces the same output as the one above.

```
ffmpeg -i audiofile.wav -ss 701 -t 90 audiofile.wav
```

As usual, entering `man ffmpeg` will display the program’s manual.


## Downloading from the shell with wget

Just type `wget` in the terminal, followed by a URL, to download a given file; we used `wget` earlier to download our audio sample set. Try the following example, which will download a 1951 performance of John Cage's *Imaginary Landscape No. 4*:

```
wget https://archive.org/download/SparksKaeganCageJohnLectureOnNothing2007/02-01-John-Cage-Imaginary-Landscape-No.-4_March-No.-2_1951.mp3
```

With the `-i` option, we can download multiple files at once. Just create a text file with one URL per line and pass it to `wget`. 

```
wget -i url_list.txt
```

Take a moment and create a text file containing 3 or 4 MP3 URLs from [UbuWeb Sound](http://ubu.com/sound/) (or another site of your choice), then download the list with `wget`. If you like, use FFmpeg to convert the files you downloaded to WAV.

By adding a few more options, we can quickly download every MP3 (or whatever format we choose) linked from a given web page.

```
wget -c -A "*.mp3" -r -l 1 -H -nd http://www.ubu.com/sound/cage.html
```

- -c: Continue downloading partially completed files. This way you can safely resume downloading if your Internet connection cuts out (or you close your laptop by mistake).
- -A "*.mp3": Accept files that match the provided pattern. In this case we're looking for anything that ends with `.mp3`.
- -r: Recursively follow links.
- -l 1: Limit recursion to 1 level (i.e., only follow links on this page).
- -nd: Stands for "no directory." By default, wget copies the directory structure of the site we've specified; this tells it to download everything to the current directory instead.
- -H: Enables host spanning, i.e., following links to other sites.

If you change your mind in the middle of a scrape, just press `Ctrl+C` to stop the process.

## Download from YouTube, Vimeo, SoundCloud, etc. with youtube-dl

Download highest-quality copy of a video to the current directory:

    youtube-dl http://some/video

Download audio only as WAV:

    youtube-dl --extract-audio --audio-format wav http://some/video

Download audio only as 320Kbps MP3:

    youtube-dl --extract-audio --audio-format mp3 --audio-quality 320k http://some/video


[*>> Forward to 1.7*](1.7.md)
