# Day 1, Session 4
### 2:45 – 4:30 pm

## Python introduction

<!-- possibly continuing Bash intro from before lunch -->

<!-- Go through the beginning of this together. -->

Open a new terminal window in <a href="http://127.0.0.1:8888/terminals/99" target="_blank">Jupyter</a>. Type `python` and hit return to launch the Python shell. You can tell you're in the Python shell (as opposed to Bash) by the `>>>` characters to the left of your cursor.

```
python
```

Let's do a little math. Enter the following and hit return.

```
1+1
```

Now let's print a string.

```
print('1337 skillz')
```

Python's shell (also known as a REPL, or read-eval-print loop) is great for getting a feel for the language and completing small tasks. For most of this course, however, we'll be using Jupyter's notebook interface for Python. Type `quit()` and hit return to go back to the Bash shell.

```python
quit()
```

We'll begin by launching a pre-made Jupyter notebook to get a sense of what it's useful for. Run the following commands to download and unzip the file.

```
wget https://github.com/hipstas/audio-tagging-toolkit/blob/master/scripts/Classify_and_Play.zip?raw=true -O Classify_and_Play.zip
unzip Classify_and_Play.zip
```

Go to <a href="http://127.0.0.1:8888/" target="_blank">Jupyter's home screen</a> and click on the directory `Classify_and_Play`. Now click `Classify_and_Play.ipynb` to open the notebook.

Click `Cell` in the Jupyter toolbar (top left), then select `Run All`. The script will download a recording by the poet Amiri Baraka, to which it will apply an applause classifier. We're off to the races!

Don't worry too much about what's going on in this notebook; we'll return to it later once we've trained some classifiers of our own.

Back in the Jupyter terminal, use `wget` to download the notebook file we'll be using for the rest of this module.

```
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/stevemclaugh/HILT-Audio-ML/master/Day_1/1.7_Python_Introduction.ipynb
```

Go back to <a href="http://127.0.0.1:8888/" target="_blank">Jupyter's home screen</a> and you should see the file [1.7_Python_Introduction.ipynb](1.7_Python_Introduction.ipynb). (You may need to refresh the page.) Click on it to launch the notebook.

[*<< Back to 1.7*](1.7.md) | [*Forward to 1.8 >>*](1.8.md)
